Energy Department Note No. 53
(Continuation of P.U.N. series)
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
ENERGY DEPARTMENT
ENERGY NOTES
RENEWABLE ENERGY
February 19, 1980
Central Projects Staff
Energy Department
This paper is one of a series issued by the Energy Department
(formerly Energy, Water and Telecommunications Department) for
the information and guidance of Bank staff working in the
energy sector. It may not be published or quoted as representing
the views of the Bank Group, and the Bank Group does not accept
responsibility for its accuracy or completeness.


RENEWABLE ENERGY
ABSTRACT
This paper was prepared to help set the stage for
a Bank-wide consideration of the possible scope and content
of an expanded Bank program of support for the development of
new and renewable energy sources. It first discusses in
general terms the role renewable energy may play in dealing
with the problems related td oil prices and shortages of
traditional fuels such as firewood,and then turns to discussions
of specific renewable energy technologies.
Prepared by: Messrs. R.S. Dosik, D. Hughart, and P. Krahe (consultant)
,                   of the Energy Department
February 19, 1980


RENEWABLE ENERGY
Page
I     INTRODUCTION.....
II.    THE CASE FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY........................          2
III. RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES, TECHNOLOGIES AND
APPLICATIONSATIONS...........................                 7
A.   Biomass:   Solid Fuels ...9
Wood Fuelsl...............                    .            9
Agricultural and Processing Plant Residues .....          18
B.   Biomass: Liquid and Gaseous Fuels .............          22
Alcohol.........................................          22
Biogas..........................................          24
Producer Gas...          .     ...         .......  .    28
C.   Other Solar Energy Sources ...................           29
Solar Thermal.............................           29
Photovoltaics ....... ........................          34
Windmills..s................................          37
Small Hydro ..........                                   42


FIGURES
1. Improved Wood Stoves
2. Charcoal Kilns
3. Six Tons Per Day Pyrolytic Conversion System (Proposed)
4. Addition of Bagasse Drying System to Sugar Mill Boiler Plant
5. Biogas Digestors
6. Solar Drier
7. Schematic of a Typical SOFRETES Solar Water Pumping System
8. Photovoltaic Equipment
9. Windmill Taxomony
10. Small Hydro Equipment
TABLES
1. Water Pumping Windmills
2. Wind Electric Generators
3. Micro-Hydro Generating Equipment Costs
4. Small-Hydro Site Survey Checklist
5. Workshop Requirements for Fabrication of Small Hydro Turbines and
Related Equipment


I. INTRODUCTION
1.        The potential of new and renewable energy resources for meeting
developing country needs has attracted mounting attention in recent years both
in the developing countries themselves and among aid donors.  Many developing
country governments have expressed their "interest" in renewable energy and
there appear to be few countries in the developing world today that do not
have "programs" of some sort underway. Frequently, these programs consist of
research and testing activities conducted on a small scale, ad-hoc basis,
often under university or foundation auspices. However, a number of countries
have larger and more systematic programs that enjoy considerable official
support and a few countries--e.g., Brazil, India, Israel, the Philippines--have
substantial, well funded and well organized renewable energy programs that
play an important role in national energy plans. The run-up to the 1981 UN
Conference on New and Renewable Energy Sources seems certain to see a further
rapid rise in interest in renewable energy on all sides.
2.        As regards aid, many of the major bilateral donors have made clear
that they consider renewable energy a priority area. Earlier this year OECD
reported that its members already had more than 300 projects underway in 60
countries and many donors have undertaken major studies intended to assist
them in defining priorities and developing expanded assistance programs.
USAID, in particular, has a strong legislative mandate to assist in developing
renewable energy and has proposed that the nearly $40 million currently budgeted
for this purpose be more than doubled in FY81. Among the regional banks, IDB
is providing technical assistance in a number of countries and has several
loan projects under consideration; the Asian Development Bank is now reported
to be committed, in principle, to working in renewable energy, although it
still appears to be at a very early stage in its thinking on the subject. The
major aid donors underlined their intention of stepping up aid in this area
when they specifically pledged at the Tokyo summit to "do more to'help devel-
oping countries increase the use of renewable energy."
3.        The summit communique also stated that World Bank "coordination" of
these aid efforts would be welcome. This suggestion must be regarded mainly
as a tribute to the Bank's general standing in the development community
since, with the notable exception of its operations in hydro-electric power
and forestry, the Bank's involvement with renewable energy has so far been
minimal. Although there has been considerable and growing interest in renew-
able energy in many parts of the Bank, and a good deal of research and policy
spadework has been done, the Bank effort to date has hardly been commensurate
with the growing interest among developing countries and aid donors alike.
Thus, the time has clearly come to take a hard and careful look at renewable
energy with a view to assessing the nature and magnitude of the part the Bank
can play in its development. This paper is intended to serve as a starting
point and as background for a Bank-wide effort to determine, in practical
terms, what it can do, when and where over the coming 3-5 years.


-2-
II. THE CASE FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY
The Need
1.        The growing concern with the role of renewable energy in the devel-
oping world has arisen in response to three interrelated stimuli:
- the international "oil crisis" and the impetus it has
given to the search for alternative, indigenous energy
resources everywhere;
-  increasing recognition of the critical situation that
has developed with respect to the supply of fuelwood,
the renewable resource on which the developing countries
depend so heavily for energy, particularly in rural areas;
- growing appreciation of the need to increase the access
of the poor to energy as part of programs to alleviate
poverty and meet basic needs.
2.        Spiraling oil prices and the continuing threat of international
supply interruptions have providedLan even-stronger-stimulus-to-..interest -in -
alternative energy sources in developing countries than it has in the indus-
trialized world. Most obviously, the impact of the oil crisis on the balance
of payments and economic growth of many developing countries has been severe,
and their relative economic and financial weakness makes them particularly
vulnerable to further financial shocks and supply constraints. In addition,
developing countries regard the continuation of past rapid incr'ases in modern
sector energy consumption as essential to the achievement of their growth
obejectives and so have feared that the end of the era of cheap oil may have
foreclosed prospects for rapid growth unless viable energy alternatives can be
quickly found. As in many developed countries, conservation and increased
efficiency in energy use are regarded as helpful, but not as adequate alterna-
tives to increasing energy supplies to meet growing needs. Finally, the oil
situation has stimulated interest in the development of indigenous energy
resources by underscoring the vulnerability of the developing economies to
external forces beyond their control and, thus, heightening general concerns
about "dependency."
3.        While the impact of the oil crisis cannot be overstated, interest in
renewable energy has also been stimulated by an increasing awareness of the
fact that, because of the worsening fuelwood situation, many developing
countries face an energy crisis of major proportions in this area, too. In
contrast to the oil crisis, a highly visible modern sector phenomenon, this


-3-
"second crisis" is a quiet one affecting the traditional sectors of the
developing economies. However, quiet crisis that it may be, it affects a
major element in the overall energy supply picture in many of the developing
countries and poses a clear and present danger in the daily lives of much of
the population of the developing world. We do not know with any precision
what faction of total energy consumption in the developing countries is
presently supplied by such traditional, renewable sources as firewood, char-
coal, crop residues and animal dung 1/ but we do know that these sources
account for virtually .all of the energy used in many rural areas and it
appears that they may account for about 25% of total energy consumption in the
developing world. Africa is most dependent on renewable sources, Asia somewhat
less, and Latin America least dependent on renewable sources. This energy is
devoted largely to household uses, primarily cooking, which accounts for the
great bulk of total energy consumption in rural areas and among the urban
poor. It appears that some 2 billion people, or about 75% of the population
of the developing countries, presently use traditional fuels for cooking.
Most of these have access to firewood, but between 0.5 and 1.0 billion use
agricultural and animal wastes to fuel their cooking fires.
4.        The rural energy crisis stems from the fact that the developing
countries have been consuming their wood supplies far more rapidly than they
can be renewed, with grave environmental and economic consequences. Fuelwood
harvesting to meet the energy needs of rapidly growing populations, land
clearing for agric-ul-tural- -purposes .and:&i-nereased-umbe-r-ingi--together,-resulted------ -
in a reduction of same 500 million ha. (more than 15%) in the world's closed
forest area during 1963-73. At present, it is estimated that the world's
tropical forests are being consumed at a rate of some 1.29% or 10-15 million
ha. per annum. Deforestation, particularly on steep hillsides, has contributed
to soil erosion that has reduced upland water storage capacity and increased
the siltation of reservoirs (shortening their lives), irrigation ,canals
(raising maintenance costs) and river beds (increasing the danger of flooding).
The search for fuelwood has also been an important factor in the destruction
of covering vegetation in arid and semi-arid areas, thus contributing to
desertification. As fuelwood supplies have become exhausted, people have been
forced to turn increasingly to the burning of dung and agricultural residues,
a practice'which deprives the soil of valuable nutrients and organic condi-
tioning material. It is estimated that the amount of dung now being burned is
equivalent to some 20 million tons of foregone food grain production annually.
5.        The human cost of the renewable energy crisis has also been high,
both in terms of its immediate impact on the lives of the poor, and on the
long-term prospects for alleviating poverty. The severe fuelwood shortages
that have emerged in many parts of the developing world have put a heavy
1/ Although firewood and charcoal are frequently traded to some extent,
these are generally considered "non-commercial" energy sources as distin-
guished from commercial fuels such as kerosene, coal and bottled gas.


-4-
burden on the labor and cash resources of low income groups. Villagers,
mainly women and children, who could previously collect fuelwood in the
immediate vicinity of their homes, frequently now must search for it a half
day's walk, or more, away. For example, villagers in the upland areas of
Nepal are spending the equivalent of 5-19 person days per month on family
fuelwood collection while in some parts of Tanzania 250-300 work days are
required to meet family ne'eds. Nor is the impact limited to rural areas. A
recent Bank survey found poor families in Bujumbura, the capital of Burundi,
to be spending upwards of 30% of their income for fuel (mainly charcoal).
6.        The long-term implications of the renewable energy crisis are
perhaps even more disturbing. While people in much of the developing world
are finding themselves hard put to maintain even their existing very low
levels of energy consumption, the development process has historically involved
substantial increases in energy use. Total energy consumption, including
traditional as well as commercial energy, among the rural and urban poor in
developing countries today is roughly estimated to average only 0.25 t.o.e.
(tons of oil equivalent) per capita per annum, or just about what is generally
considered to be a bare subsistence level. This figure compares with world
average consumption of 1.25 t.o.e. and the 3 to 6 t.o.e. reached in the OECD
countries. While the developing countries cannot and, indeed need not aspire
to present Western levels of consumption, there can be no doubt that a sub-
stantial increase in the availability of energy to lower income groups must be
an intrinsic part of any poverty-oriented development strategy. Although
quantification is -obviously fraught'with difficulty, studies have indicated
that the minimum level of energy consumption consistent with a satisfactory
life providing opportunity for improved health and well-being lies in the are&
of 0.6-0.8 t.o.e. - i.e., double to triple the present consumption level of
the poor in developing countries.
Assets and Liabilities
7.        The case for renewable energy is also buttressed by the particular
advantages the developing countries possess with respect to both the sources
and uses of such energy. The bulk of population of developing world lives in
the tropical zones straddling the equator - i.e., in the latitudes which
naturally receive the greatest amount of solar radiation. For example, India
receives an average of 0.17 t.o.e. per m2 per year and the Sahelian countries
0.19, compared with average insolation levels of 0.15 in the U.S. and 0.09 in
Western Europe.1/ The abundance of solar energy is also reflected in the way
that biomass flourishes in the tropics, giving many of the developing countries
another major renewable resource. Unlike fossil fuels, which contain energy
in relatively concentrated and portable forms suitable for use in large
central generating facilities, solar radiation and biomass can be economically
1/ Data for Sahelian and European countri6s are unweighted national averages.


-5-
exploited on a small scale, decentralized basis. These renewable resources
are, thus, well matched to the needs of the developing countries with their
still largely rural populations often dispersed in small, isolated villages.
In addition, much of the equipment needed for many of the renewable energy
technologies is suitable for domestic production in even the less industrially
advanced of the developing countries.
8.        The developing countries also possess the perverse "advantage" that,
because of the relatively high cost to them of energy from conventional
sources, the economics of renewable energy is likely to be more attractive,
sooner than in the developed world, particularly for rural applications. In
developing countries, the cost of electricity from large thermal or hydro-
electric power stations supplying the national grid generally now falls in the
5-10 cents per kwh range. However, it is estimated that only about 35% of the
total population of the developing countries, and about 15% of their rural
population is connected to the grid. Where the grid does not reach, the
conventional alternative for meeting small scale needs is usually diesel
generated power which can be estimated to cost, today, more than 20 cents per
kwh from larger (e.g., 100 kw) units typically used to supply electricity to
small towns and as much as 45 cents per kwh from the smallest (1 kw) unit used
by individual consumers.
9.        Needless to say, there are also important factors to be taken into
account on the debit side when considering the case for renewable energy in
the developing countries. The most important obstacles to the rapid exploita-
tion of their renewable energy potential appear to lie in the following
areas:
- institutional weaknesses in energy planning and
programming;
-  lack of basic data on renewable energy;
-  limited technical capabilities;
problems of dissemination and socio-cultural adaptation.
10.       As in so many areas of development, institutional weaknesses present
perhaps the most formidable obstacles to the realization of the developing
countries renewable energy potential. While again, the situation varies
widely from country to country, the most general problem is the absence in
most developing countries (like most developed ones) of coherent national
energy plans that can provide a framework for defining the overall role of
renewable energy, for determining priorities among the various technologies
and for assigning resources accordingly. This, in turn, reflects the frequent
lack both of the basic information on national energy balances essential to


-6-
rational planring and of planning agencies with the analytic capabilities
necessary to assess the impact of alternative strategies on the nation's
energy future. A second, related area of weakness is the lack of insti-
tutional focal points for planning renewabie energy strategies, devising and
supporting research and development programs and promoting commercial applica-
tions.
11.       The specific data base necessary to realistically assess the present
and future role of renewable energy is also sorely lacking in most developing
countries. Hard information on the existing situation with respect to the
sources, uses, and costs of renewable energy is available only from a limited
number of case studies and there have been few efforts to take careful stock
of the extent and distribution of national resources for the production of
energy from biomass, solar radiation, the wind or small hydro sites. In most
countries, the launching of systematic efforts to fill the most serious data
gaps is a prerequisite to the rational selection of development priorities and
sound program planning. As regards technical capabilities, the technologies
involved in exploiting renewable energy require varying degrees of scientific
and engineering sophistication. A few involve new developments falling in the
realm of high technology (e.g., photovoltaics); others, while also relatively
new, demand more in the way of careful engineering than scientific sophistica-
tion (e.g., solar collectors). The developing countries need, at a minimum,
the capacity to keep abreast of the latest technical developments, to adapt
technologies to'local conditions, and to apply them successfully. While local
capability clearly extends far beyond this in some of the more advanced
countries (India, Brazil, Korea), many of the developing countries presently
do not have the intellectual or material resources to deal meaningfully with
even the less sophisticated renewable energy technologies.
12.       The fourth major area of concern is the weakness of.existing exten-
sion services and other mechanisms of dissemination capable of reaching the
rural and urban poor with knowledge about renewable energy and providing them
with.the technical assistance necessary for its application. The latter area
is a particularly important and sensitive one. Civen the predominance of
household energy use among the poor, the impact of the renewable technologies
will to a large extent depend on the developing countries' ability to make
them available in forms compatible with the needs, capabilities and life
styles of their people.


-7-
III. RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES, TECHNOLOGIES AND APPLICATIONS
1.        While all renewable (as well as most non-renewable) energy, of
course, originates from the sun, the specific renewable energy sources the sun
provides us with are numerous and varied. So, too, are the means by which
these renewable resources can be applied to meeting man's needs. They include
botanical and bacteriological technologies (the raising of trees for firewood
and the biogas digestor) as well as chemical and electrical ones (alcohol
production and photovoltaics). The following pages seek to briefly explore
the technologies that now seem to hold the greatest near-medium term interest
for developing countries as regards their technical status, economic compet-
itiveness and commercial availability. The principal developing country
applications for which the various technologies are suitable, the major
constraints on their dissemination and the impact they can be expected to have
in meeting traditional and modern sector energy needs will also ie explored.
2.        For the present purpose, these renewable energy sources may be
considered as falling in three broad groups. The first is biomass in its
traditional solid forms--i.e., the wood and agricultural residues the burning
of which plays the critical role already discussed in meeting rural energy
needs in developing countries. The second group encompasses the use of
biomass in non-traditional forms--i.e., converted into liquid and gaseous
fuels by chemical, biological and thermal processes. The third group consists
of a number of quite disparate renewable energy sources that are "solar" in
the broadest sense. These include the heat of the sun itself, the conversion
of solar radiation to electricity and the exploitation of the energy content
of the wind and small hydro sites. Conventional or large hydro is omitted
from this discussion because it is familiar; wave power, ocean thermal and
tidal power because they do not seem to be of even medium-term importance for
developing countries.
3.        As already discussed, it is in the area of biomass solid fuels that
the most pressing need exists for developing renewable resources to meet the
basic energy needs of much of the population of the developing world. This
need can be met by expanding the supply of fuelwood, by improving the effi-
ciency with which wood and other solid fuels are burned, and by making them
available for broader, including urban, applications by the use of techniques
that make them easier to transport and handle. These approaches offer great
potential for development. Moreover, technical and economic problems appear
to pose fewer difficulties in this area than they do in the case of other
renewable energy sources. While the "technologies" involved--e.g., growing
trees for fuelwood, conversion of wood to charcoal, and cooking stoves--are
certainly susceptible to improvement, the existing technical base seems
broadly adequate to support a development effort commensurate with the magni-
tude of the need. However, this is also the area in which the rate of progress
will be most dependent on success in institution-building, particularly in
developing cost-effective means of dissemination, and in dealing with socio-
cultural issues.


-8-
4.        The conversion of biomass to liquid and gaseous fuels is of particu-
lar interest from a medium-longer term perspective because of the promise it
holds out for using biomass to meet modern as well as traditional sector
energy needs. Technologies for making fuels from biomass that can substitute
directly for petroleum products are relatively well established. Alcohol
production, the technology that has attracted the greatest interest to date,
appears to be an economic proposition today where circumstances are particu-
larly favorable, but is no panacea for the petroleum problems of the developing
world. At present, costs of production generally appear too high to make
alcohol economically-competitive. Nevertheless, research and development can
be expected to reduce costs in existing agricultrual and industrial technol-
ogies and, perhaps, to give rise to entirely new and less costly ones.
Furthermore, cost considerations alone cannot be expected to determine national
energy-strategies, given the unpredictability of the international oil situa-
tion and the importance to national decision makers of economic security and
related considerations. In the case of biogas production, which could make an
important contribution to meeting rural, particularly household energy needs,
the future is also clouded by uncertainties regarding both costs and benefits.
Moreover, even if its economic problems can be "solved," the dissemination of
biogas technology will require large scale extension efforts carefully tailored
to socio-cultural circumstances.
5.        Although the solar technologies in the third group range from the
very new (photovoltaics) to the very traditional (windmills), all are on-line
today with equipment readily available commercially from manufacturers in a
number of developing countries as well as the industrialized ones. Prospects"
for technical progress vary, with the potential naturally being greatest in
the case of the never technologies. Solar water heating is already cost
competitive under most conditions but the economics of technologies- Such as
photovoltaics, wind, and small hydro is highly situation specific and can be
expected to remain so. Technical progress and the rising cost of oil can be
expected to considerably broaden the scope for economic applications but these
technologies are unlikely to supply more than a small share of developing
country energy in the foreseeable future.
6.        Needless to say, no one of the technologies discussed below is
likely to solve by itself the energy problems of the developing countries.
However, each one can and will provide a part of the ultimate answer.


-9-
A. BIOMASS: SOLID FUELS
WOOD FUELS
Fuelwood Production
1.        The bulk of the developing world's poor depend for energy on wood, a
"renewable" resource that is, in fact, being critically depleted. In view of
the magnitude of the need and the gravity of the situation, high priority
clearly must be given to increasing the supply of fuelwood. Recognizing this,
the Bank two years ago launched an expanded social forestry program under
which eight forestry loans and credits totaling $125 million and fourteen
forestry components in agriculture and rural development projects have already
been made to finance about 360,000 ha. of fuelwood. After a maturation3period
of 5-10 years, this area can be expected to yield roughly 3.5 million m  of
wood with an energy value of about 0.85 million t.o.e. per annum. Ten other
fuelwood projects are under preparation or appraisal.
2.        Fuelwood production is being financed as part of national forestry
programs and also through agriculture and rural development projects which
include a wide variety of components. In some cases, they include establish-
ment and management of plantations by a national forest service. In others,
the emphasis is on establishment of woodlots by villagers and/or individual
farmers. Nurseries to provide seedlings and extension agents to provide
technical assistance are typical of these projects.
3.        Woodfuel projects are innovations for many of the borrowers involved
as well as for the Bank. Some of the projects financed can be characterized
as pilot projects in the sense that they are not scaled to meet total estimated
woodfuel requirements but, rather, to build the institutions, train the
manpower, and test the technical packages and extension techniques that can
form the basis for larger subsequent projects. In parallel, many projects
include research, survey, and study components aimed at resolving the ques-
tions that need to be answered before larger-scale projects are designed:
quantification and geographic distribution of future woodfuel shortages, land
availability, local trials of alternative tree species, the consequence and
costs of failure to get more trees grown, potential for conserving wood
through more efficient use, etc.
.       4.        The economic justification of woodfuel projects has been a difficult
issue both within the Bank and in obtaining the support of national governments.
It is generally difficult to project how much burning of agricultural crop
residue and animal dung or how much soil erosion, siltation, and flooding will


- 10 -
occur if a project is not carried out; what will the costs be in terms of
agricultural production foregone? reservoir capacity lost? or flood damage?
and what will people use for fuel, and at what cost, -.is wood becomes more
scarce or unobtainable? Monitoring and evaluation studies are being included
in fuelwood projects, which in time will give a better insight into these
issues.
5.        The major obstacles to woodfuel projects appear to be in the need to
mobilize effective local participation in their planning and management and,
to this end, to build and maintain strong local support for them. Adequate
protection of woodlots from grazing and fire, competition for land, and
development of adequate technical packages also pose serious issues. Woodfuel
shortages are most often found in areas where the pressure of population on
land resources is high and land that can be used for raising food cannot be
spared for wood production. However, fuelwood species do not require land of
as high a quality as is required for crop production and most projects utilize
lands of marginal quality and/or lands bordering cultivated areas (e.g.
roadsides, boundaries between fields). While a tree species appropriate for a
given 4rea can often be identified without extensive trials the best species
and sub-species and the best combination of planting, fertilizing, and disease
protection techniques--the "technical package"--generally cannot be determined
without local trials. Strong local support for woodfuel production is gener-
ally needed to get the -land -andlabor zrequired-ta- estab1ish-  weedot andto
assure maintenance and protection of the woodlot while it is growing to
maturity.
Stoves
6.        Of equal, if not greater, importance than increasing the supply of
firewood is improving the efficiency with which it is used. Available data
indicates that the poor in the developing countries actually use more fuel for
cooking than people in industrialized countries because they are able to
effectively utilize only a small fraction of the energy available in the wood
that they burn. This is because most people who cook with wood use "stoves"
that accoiplish little more than holding the pan, pot or other cooking vessel
at an appropriate height above an essentially open fire. ?uny improvements
are possible in this system. Generally, they involve enclosing the fire,
regulating the flow of air into the stove, and adding a chimney. These
measures can increase efficiency by a factor of 4 to 5 in laboratory tests; a
-halving of fuel requirements for household use has been claimed for a variety
of designs. In some designs, the stove is given a large thermal mass, so that
much of the heat which is lost for cooking purposes is released over an
extended period after a meal is cooked and is thus useful for space heating.in
high altitude and other areas where this is needed.
7.        The primary purpose of the chimney is to improve the stove's draft.
In effect, this allows for a greater extraction of heat from the combustion


Figure I
IMPROVED WOOD STOVES
k1
ii!
(Section)
Wood Storage
(Complete Stove)


- 12 -
gases by increasing the efficiency with which their buoyancy is used to pull
air through the stove. The chimney can also be used to conduct the exhaust
gases out of the home, which helps improve eye-and-respiratory system health.
In some areas, however, smoke in the home is considered beneficial because it
drives away insects that attack not only people but also roofing materials.
8.        Regulation of the flow of air into the stove is crucial because
without it the improved draft produced by the chimney can cause the fuel to
burn much faster than desired and actually reduce cooking efficiency.
9.        Two general types of improved stoves have been developed. The type
illustrated in Figure 1 is sometimes referred to as a "mud" stove, but is in
fact made from a mixture of sand and clay with enough sand to prevent excessive
cracking and enough clay to hold the stove together. The clay should fire,
producing a hard surface in the firebox and flues. The chimney may be made
from metal stovepipe, bamboo, lengths of ceramic pipe, or built up with bricks
of stove material. Such stoves are estimated to cost no more than $5-10,
including labor. They thus appear to represent an extremely low cost approach
to effectively increase fuel supplies and to be affordable by the bulk of the
poor without the need for subsidy or special programs.
10.       The second type of improved stove is made with a metal shell,
usually a used can of 5-gallon or larger capacity. An inner liner of ceramic
or other mateiial may-be= us=ed--to- separatehe-fie-fromr=the-shed+, redveing -
heat losses and prolonging the shell's life. The cooking vessel and food may
be placed on top of the shell for frying or inside it for stewing and higher..
efficiency. Some stoves of this type are designed to be packed with sawdust,
rice hulls, or other loose fuels rather than for use with wood.
11.       Improved stoves have been developed in many countries *but successful
efforts to get them into widespread use are few. The best documented case is
in Guatemala. The key elements in the program there appear to be (a) a
feedback process during stove design development that allowed the stove
designers to incorporate users' desires that have little or nothing to do with
fuel efficiency (e.g., waist-level working surface, safety for children,
resemblafice to department store stoves) and (b) an extension system that
relies not on civil servants but on artisans with a direct interest in selling
their services as stove builders.
Charcoal
12.       Charcoal is a widely used household fuel in areas at some distance
from sources of wood because it is much more economically transported and
handled than an equivalent amount of wood. A given volume of charcoal contains
as much energy as the same volume of stacked, air-dried wood, but weighs only
about half as much and is easily packed in bags. Charcoal is in many countries
the most widely used household fuel in urban areas while firewood is used by


- 13 -
rural populations closer to the source of supply. Charcoal also has important
industrial uses. Steel plants use it in place of coke in Brazil, Australia,
and the Philippines. It is also used for manufacturing lime and cement, for
drying hops, tobacco, and fish, and for smelting metals.
13.       Charcoal is produced by pyrolysis, heating with insufficient oxygen
to support combustion. When wood is heated to about 25000 (4800F), a distil-
lation process occurs. Moisture and volatile materials in the wood evaporate
leaving carbon and inert materials in the form of charcoal. Given sufficient
oxygen, all of these materials except for the ash will burn, but in applying
heat without oxygen it is possible to convert wood or other similar materials
to charcoal, gas, and liquid fuels. At ambient temperature and pressure
conditions, some of the volatiles will condense to form liquids while others
remain gases. In most charcoal kilns, a substantial fraction of the raw
material is burned to provide the heat required for the pyrolysis process.
Modern kilns produce a ton of charcoal from about six cubic meters of wood,
while traditional earthen kilns require as much as twice as much. The conver-
sion from wood to charcoal thus has an energy efficiency of about 20% in
traditional kilns or 40% with modern equipment. While much energy is lost in
the process of conversion to charcoal, charcoal stoves are typically more
efficient than open wood fires.
14.       Charcoal is traditionally produced with little more equipment than
an axe and a shovel; earthen kilns are made by covering a pile of wood with a
layer of dirt (figure 2). . Some of 'the wood-must-_be burned-to--provide the,heat-
needed to reduce the remainer to charcoal, and if the kiln is not carefully
built and controlled, the fraction burned will be higher than need be. A
disadvantage of earthen kilns are that gases and liquids produced are not
captured; utilization of the gaseous and liquid products of pyrolysis as well
as the charcoal can increase the overall energy efficiency from about 40% to
about 80%. Moreover, the charcoal can be separated only imperfectly from the
dirt and the process also produces about 20% of fines that are not useable as
fuel.
15.       Charcoal making can be improved in several ways. First, significant
improvements can be made in the traditional earthen kilns. For example, a
Brazilian research institute has developed a model kiln that significantly
reduces the production of fines and from which volatile liquids can be con-
densed for treatment elsewhere. Use of this kiln is now being promoted under
an extension program. Secondly, steel kilns costing $1,000-2,000 and small
enough to be hauled by truck or disassembled and rolled from site to site can
be used.l/. This allows for better control of the process, so the fraction of
1/ Sizes range from oil drums to cylinders 2-3 meters in both diameter and
height.


- 14 -
Figure 2
CHARCOAL KILNS
layer of leaves-,
grass, etc.
layer of soil
m                 'Earth 'Kiln
1.5m
PPottåblé Steel Kiln
COMPONENT PARTS'
2 cylinders(2.32m diameterxQ.91m high
2.32m diameterx0.76m high
1 cover  Q2.32m diameterx0.46m high
at center (46)
1 cap    (0.45m diameter
8 smoke boxes @0.1 5x0.9x0.7 m
with closeable
caps and coilars
4 chimneys Q)2.30m highx0.10m diameter


- 15 -
wood burned is reduced closer to the theoretical minimum and the problem of
contamination with dirt is avoided. Earth and steel kilns are illustrated in
Figure 2.
16.       A third level of improvement is to use a larger masonry kiln. The
lower surface: volume ratio and better insulation reduce loss of heat and
thus further improve yields. However, use of these kilns requires supplying a
flow of wood to a fixed point over a period of years or disassembling and
rebuilding the kiln to follow the w9od supply. Estimated cost of a cement
kiln with a capacity of about 180 m is $20,000.
17.       With either metal or masonry kilns, the gases and vapors produced by
wood distillation can be drawn off in a mixture also including the products of
the combustion of that part of the charge burned to provide heat for the
process. By letting the mixture cool, the liquid component ("pyrolytic oils")
can be separated out. In the system illustrated in Figure 3, the remaining
gas is used to fuel a drier to reduce the moisture content of the raw material
and the charcoal and liquids are collected as products.
18.       Finally, an externally heated retort can be substituted for the
internally heated kiln. This requires an external heat source and conduction
of the process heat through the walls of the container, but allows conversion
of all the wood used to charcoal (if some other fuel is used as a heat source)
and keeps the gases resulting from wood distillation separate from the combus-
tion products.
19.       The most widely successful charcoal production systems appear to be'
the earth kilns and masonry kilns. The portable steel kilns have been used in
a number of countries but seem to have been abandoned as often as not. The
retorts are apparently too costly to be justified by their advantages.
20.       Where significant improvements over commonly used charcoaling
techniques are feasible, it may be possible to design project components to
provide training for charcoal makers to improve yields. More capital-intensive
kilns might be employed by forestry departments or commercial organizations to
make prodqctive use of wood that would otherwise be wasted in land-clearing
efforts or as logging or sawmill residues.
Power Generation
21.       The use of wood-fueled power plants by industries and/or public
utilities also appears economically promising and in fact has been common
practice in the saw milling and pulp and paper industries for many decades.
A 1977 assessment of wood energy resources in New England includes a list of
fourteen wood-fired boilers operating in the region. The Eugene (Oregon)
Water and Electric Board uses wood to raise steam for a 33.8 MW power plant
and to provide district heating for customers in the downtown area. The Jari
forest products complex in Brazil includes a 55 MW wood-fired power plant that
is perhaps the largest in the developing world.


Figure 3
SIX TONS PER DAY PYROLYTIC ::)NVCRSION SYSTCM (PROPOSED)
Noncondensed
Removable
Covers
nPut                  ________oic
Feed                                              AC   r 2As-Received Feed
Introduced and Dried
00
Particulate
Material
rO I
Component
'uyeres             Item      Name                   Component Description
Gad       o  0                   1   Kilns           Sheet metal kilns, fabricated locally
Gt2                Ducting         Sheet metal, insulated, fabricated locally
Char          3   Cyclone         Sheet metal, insulated, fabricated locally
Storage        4   Condenser       3-pass, tube type, fabricated locally-
S   Draft Fan       Centrifugal, probably imported
6   Modified IRRI   Batch drier, composed of both locally fabri-
Drier           cated and imported parts


-17 -
Wood-fired power plants appear to be viable competitors to diesel
plants in areas where adequate wood fuel supplies can be assured for the life-
of a plant at costs on the order of $15-20 per ton ($75-120 per t.o.e.). For
a simple comparison, we might start with the following assumptions:
Capital cost:             $750/kw diesel
$1500/kw wood
Load factor:              3000 hr/yr (34%)
Capital charge factor:    12% p.a.
Heat rate:                3,000 kcal/kwh diesel
3,500 kcal/kwh wood
Fuel value:               1,400,000 kcal/barrel diesel
1,750,000/ton wood (50% moisture)
Fuel prices:             -$40/barrel =95.2i/U.S. Gallon Diesel
$15/ton    =cae $20/cubic meter wood
The asumptions yield fuel consumptions rates of 0.002 tons of green wood or
barrels of diesel per kwh and unit costs (in   per kwh) of:
capital    fuel    total
Diesel                      3.0       8.0     11.0
Wood                        6.0       3.0      9.0
In this simple comparison, the wood-fired plant costs 3J/kwh more to build but
saves Uw/kwh in'fuel costs and thus comes out 2J/kwh cheaper. This result is
obviously not definitive. Non-fuel operating and maintenance costs would
raise both totals and may reverse the apparent cost advantage of the wood-fired
plant. Also, almost any of the assumptions listed could be altered by enough
to change,the total cost by a least 1.0i/kwh without straining its credibility
As representing a "general" case, let alone adjusting them to fit individual
casese
22.       Wood-fired power plants would generally be most competitive in
relatively small.,plant sizes. As plant size increases, conventional alterna-
tives become cheaper and the transportation costs associated with the wood-fired
plants rise disproportionately.   Adding the i ssumption that wood is grown on a
plantation at a rate of 7 ton/ha-yr (ca. lOin  ha-yr) to/ those made above gives
us a plantation size of 1.43 ha/Kw or 14.3 km /Mw. _Tiran!:portation costs might
rise from about $1.50/ton for a 10-Mw plant to $5/ton ftr a 100-Mw plant.


-18 -
AGRICULTURAL AND PROCESSING PLANT RESIDUES
Agricultural Residues
1.        The inedible or unsalable portion of food or cash crops and animal
dung are widely used as household fuels where insufficient wood is available
for basic cooking and heating requirements and incomes do not permit use of
commercial fuels. This practice frequently has serious costs in terms of soil
quality and/or labor required to collect and prepare these fuels. In such
situations, it may be possible to address the problem in at least three
different ways. One would be to increase the quantity of fuel supplied by the
agricultural system by planting trees or woody shrubs around homes, along
roads, etc., by selecting crop varieties or cropping patterns according to
their yield of combustible residues as well as food. Where dung is an impor-
tant fuel, the use of biogas digestors might be considered (see below). These
would have the effect of allowing the dung to be used twice, once as fuel and
again as fertilizer and soil conditioner. The third approach is to improve
the efficiency with which the residues are used through improved stoves and
thus reduce the demand.
Processing Plant Wastes
2.        Many agro- and forest-industrial processes involve separating the
most valuable part-of the crop.,as -haest ed-oother-material-that -then--
becomes available as a by-product. In some cases, there are alternative uses
for this material that make it too valuable to use as fuel, but in other cases,
it has a very low value or constitutes a disposal problem. Where processing
plant residues are used as fuel, it is most often employed to provide the
energy required to operate the processing plant itself. Three types of
processing plants for which the use of residues as fuel is widespread are rice
mills, sugar mills, and saw mills.
3.        A parboiled-rice mill_1/ using traditional methods would not be able
to meet its energy requirements from its own rice husks. A ton of pad,dy
yields about 200 kg of husk, whereas the miJling of the same ton would require
about 100 kg of husks for raising steam, 75 kg for heat for drying, and
another 160 kg for producing electricity, making a total of about 335 kg, or
two-thirds more than the amount available. However, it has been 6alculated
that rice-mills could be made energy self-sufficient by using more efficient
boilers and using an integrated system in which steam is produced at a high
pressure, used to generate electricity and delivered at a lower pressure to
drive the mill, and then to a heat exchanger where it provides heat for
drying.
1/ Parboiling is a form of partial cooking. It involves soaking the rice in
50-600 C water, then pouring off the water and steaming the rice and, finally,
drying it.


- 19 -
4.        Where re-fitting of a mill is not practical or is uneconomic or
where inexpensive hydro-power or natural gas is available, it may make more
sense to use the rice husks for energy needs outside the mill. Rice husks are
used as domestic fuels in China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines,
and Vietnam. Rice husks have a high silica content which is a drawback in
many applications, but is useful in cement manufacture: a cement plant in
California reportedly gets about one-half of its energy and 15% of its silica
from rice husks.
5.        No more than half of the wood entering most sawmills emerges as
lumber. The rest are trims, sawdust, shavings, and bark. It has been estima-
ted that the energy requirements of the mill can be met with less than half of
the residual materials. However, much of this material is often useable for
paper, chipboard, and other products. In other cases, the excess may be used
to meet energy demands outside the plant by selling the wood as is, in chip or
pellet form, as charcoal, or as electricity if the mill's power system provides
excess capacity.
6.        One of the problems often encountered in the use of biomass fuels is
that of a high moisture content. Green plant material such as fresh leaves
may be 95% water by weight. This water increases the weight that must be
handled and transported and absorbs heat as it evaporates when the fuel is
burned. I/ Mechanical dewatering (e.g., by compression), sun-drying and
air-drying are all useful techniques in come cases. The system illustrated in
Figure 4 is. designed to increase the fuel valueof_f- sugar cane.bagas-se-y
drying it with the exhaust heat from the sugar mill boiler, which because of
its temperature is suitable for drying but not for power generation.
Densification
7.        Densification processes such as briquetting, pelletizing and chipping 2/
produce relatively uniform and conveniently sized pieces of fuel from material
that is too irregular and/or large or small to be easily handled, transported
or burned. Wood chippers are commonly used in the pulp and paper industry,
and a number of wood-fired power plants burn chips, including the Jari opera-
tion in Brazil. Fuel pellets have been produced from the organic portion of
municipal solid waste and from sugar cane bagasse as well as from wood. There
are at least half a dozen pellet burning installations in the US, including
two in Virginia. Charcoal briquettes are of course widely sold in developed
countries.
1/ Evaporation of a kilogram of water requires roughly 600 kcal, while com-
bustion of a kilo of 0% moisture biomass usually yields from 4,500 to
5,000 kcal.
2/  Chipping does not increase the density of individual pieces, but does
increase packing density.


20-
STORAGE
BOILER
RECL      S1            l
MILL
Typical Sugar Mill Boiler Plant
STORAGE'BIE
RECLAIM
MI'LL
Addition of Bagasse Drying System to
Sugar Mill Boiler Plant


- 21 -
8.        Briquettes are made by pressing the material into molds together
with a binder such as paraffin wax if the heat and pressure of the mold are
not sufficient to form a lump that will stay together. Pellets are produced
by extruding a dried and pulverized material under high pressure thr-ough small
round dies. Sugar cane bagasse, wood particles and the organic portion of
garbage are all suitable materials for pellets.
9.        Wood chips are made by pushing wood, which may be as large as tree
trunks and branches, through a rapidly spinning blade. The chips pack more
densely and are more easily handled and shipped than the raw material, and
they dry more rapidly. The machinery needed to produce them can be mounted on
a truck chassis and taken into forests where the terrain and soil are suitable,
so chipping can la a useful technique in some circumstances for extracting
wood that would be left behind by conventional logging techniques.
10.       Limited data suggests that processing material into pellets or chips
may cost roughly $65 per t.o.e. in the US context. To be worthwhile, any of
these processes would have to be employed in situations where the cost of the
processing was repaid by economies in storage and handling economies.
11.       Several applications can be envisaged for these technologies in
developing countries. They might be used to reduce the handling and trans-
portation costs involved in, for example, using the wood resources of the
outer islands or Indonesia or the interior of Brazil or Zaire to meet energy
requirements in urban. areas-..-They may -aso-bee-usefu& for preparationafg-  --
biomass processing plant residues for storage and shipment. A third possibil-
ity would be to use densification techniques to make useful fuel out of
charcoal fines.


- 22 -
B. BIOMASS: LIQUID AND GASEOUS FUELS
ALCOHOLS
1.        Production of alcohol, particularly ethanol, from certain types of
biomass is a commercially well-established technology. The technical feasi-
bility of using alcohol as fuel, particularly in blends with gasoline, is also
well established. Because of this ability to substitute directly for petro-
Jeum, alcohol has been the subject of more popular and, in many cases, official
interest since the oil crisis than any otrer biomass technology for the modern
sector. This interest has been greatest in Brazil where, as the result of a
massive government program, a large part of the vehicle fleet is already
operating on a "gasohol" blend of up to 20% and where the government now plans
to introduce to the general public, from next year, vehicles operating on 100%
alcohol.
2.        Two distinct types of alcohol can serve as renewable alternatives to
petroleum fuels. Ethanol (ethyl alcohol or "grain alcohol") is produced by
fermentation and distillation of carbohydrate materials and this is currently
being done on a commercial scale using saccharine materials like sugar cane,
sugar beets, and molasses and certain starchy materials like grains as feed-
stocks. Although there has-been some experienct  ithyoductian y-ftom-aiotlier
starchy crops (e.g., cassava) and from cellulosic materials like wood and
agricultural residues and solid wastes, these technologies have not been -
solidly demonstrated on a commercial scale. Methanol, also called "methyl
alcohol" or "wood alcohol," can be produced by distillation of wood or
synthesized from carbon monoxide and hydrogen which in turn may be obtained
from natural gas or coal. While considerable research is being done on the
subject, with the currently available technology production of methanol from
biomass seems less economic than the production of ethanol.
3.        Ethanol can be used to power vehicles either by itself or blended to
a maximum of about 20% with gasoline. While ethanol has approximately only
60% of the' energy content of gasoline per unit weight, it is 5% denser and
appreciably improves the octane rating when blended with gasoline. Studies
comparing fuel economies obtained with alcohol blends and regular gasoline
have obtained a range of results, but seem to indicate that, as a first
approximation, we can assume that the greater density and the octane boosting
effecting of ethanol in blends compensate for its lower energy content so that
it can substitute for gasoline on a roughly 1:1 volume basis with only very
minor engine modifications. Ethanol blends do not impose stringent require-
ments on handling and storage but can separate when water is present. When
ethanol is used straight, however, a substantially greater volume is required
to provide the energy equivalent of a given volume of gasoline, and alterations
in the design of gasoline engines (particularly in carburation) are required.
Also, due to its octane boosting value, ethanol permits energy savings in
gasoline refining and substitutes for lead additives, leading to lower emis-
sions levels.


- 23 -
4.        While there thus appears no reason to doubt the technical feasibility
of replacing petroleum with ethanol, the economics of doing so need further
analysis at the present time. Studies of experience to date suggest a wide
range of production costs--between US$0.65 to US$2.30 per gallon--depending
principally on the type and price of the agriculture raw material(s) used and
the size of the plant (as well as the source and date of the study). The cost
of alcohol production from molasses and sugar cane, the most attractive raw
materials in the immediate future, has generally been estimated to be between
US$1.00 and US$1.50 per gallon. The "spot" price of regular gasoline in the
major international markets has risen to US$1.10-1.15 in January, 1980, but
crude oil contract prices would have to rise substantially to "support" these
product prices.
5.        The economic disadvantage of ethanol production mainly reflects the
high cost of feedstocks, which typically accounts for about 60-70% of total
costs. Capital costs are relatively modest at about US$80-130 per litre
(US$300-500 peT US gallon) daily capacity for a 120,000 litres per day (80
million gallons per year based on 180 operating days/year) distillery based on
sugar cane/molasses. While the distillation process is an energy intensive
one, bagasse, a relatively low value mill waste, can be used as a fuel where
sugar or molasses is the feedstock. If petroleum must be used as a fuel, the
result is not only to increase costs but to significantly reduce oil savings.
6.        The principal avenues for reducing ethanol production costs lie in
the development of technologies that can employ cheaper feedstock (e.g.,
cassava, sweet sorghum), process improvements that increase yields, reduce
capital costs and/or reduce energy requirements, and the discovery of more
valuable uses for process by-products. Intensive research and development
activity is underway in each of these areas in many parts of the world, but it
still seems too early to assess the prospects for significant breakthroughs.
Success in producing ethanol from feedstock, such as cassava, that can be
grown efficiently on less valuable land by small holders Appears particularly
critical, since this would help to avoid the potential land use conflict
between food and fuel, broaden the scope for ethanol productior, in the devel-
oping world and enhance the employment benefits of this technology.
7.        Although ethanol production cannot be considered an economic propo-
sition today in most circumstances, the preliminAry results underway in IPD
indicate that it can be economic at the present time where, owing to special
circumstances, the real economic cost of the feedstock is very low and/or the
cost of gasoline is especially high. Such circumstances may exist, for
example, in sugar producing countries where land and labor costs are low
and/or which have surplus molasses that cannot be economically exported owing
to transport bottlenecks or high costs. Several such cases have already been
tentatively identified; a number of others no doubt exist. IPD's forthcoming
study will contain criteria for assessing the economics of alcohol production
from various feedstocks in individual country circumstances.


24
BIOGAS
1.        A "new" technology that has attracted wide interest because of its
potential for meeting rural energy needs is the production of biogas (a
mixture containing 55-65% methane) from the anaerobic 1/ decomposition of
animal, plant and human wastes by means of the methane generator, or digester.
The biogas so generated can be used directly in cooking, thus reducing the
demand for scarce firewood. In addition, the sludge remaining after the gas
has been generated retains the nitrogen and other nutrients present in the
wastes fed into the generator and thus its use resolves the fuel vs. fertilizer
conflict over the use of manures. Furthermore, the process may provide an
environmentally sound means of disposing of organic wastes that can otherwise
pose sanitary problems. The digester which accomplishes all of this is,
moreover, a simple device whose construction calls for no special skills or
materials. Finally, the digester is neither new nor untried; there has been
considerable experience with these devices in various forms in both developed
countries (mainly as an adjunct to municipal sewage plants) and in some
developing countries. Much research and development has been devoted to the
methane digester in India; they have been used successfully and in quite large
numbers in Korea and Taiwan. However, it is in mainland China that biogas
appears to have had its greatest practical success.
2.        The biogas generation process is a biological one involving several
types of bacteria and is not fully understood.o The process is sensitive to
temperature, acidity-alkalinity and to the type of feedstock used. Most
digesters are operat6d at 30-35 C, although the process can be maintained at
temperatures down to about 1000. At temperatures well above the normal range,
a different type of bacterial culture dominates ("thermophilic" as opposed to
"mesophilic") and the process of methane production is greatly accelerated.
However, a thermophilic digester must be kept at 50-68 C and the cost of main-
taining these temperatur8s may exceed the cost of using the larger digester
required to obtain the same production from a mesophilic system.
3.        A digester consists basically of a sealed container filled with a
mixture of water and the material to be digested. Gas produced rises to the
top of the container and is extracted through a tube or pipe. In most
designs, an upper portion of the container is reserved for gas storage. Raw
materials are generally added through an inlet at one end of the digester and
the digested "sludge" withdrawn via an outlet at the opposite end. At least
four families of designs have been developed (see Figure 5). They are distin-
guished by the means used to cope with variations in the quantity of gas in
storage, and by the type of construction and materials used. The "Indian"
design approach is to construct the digester in two telescoping parts, the
1/ In the absence of oxygen.


Figure 5
BIOGAS DIGESTERS
moveab(e cover    ,-fermentation liquid
ý-iniet pipe                dome as segment of                                          WEIGHTS
spherical shell                         RL%XR
P                             CrNTANER
---outlet pit
w  a  l- ---                 -
Bag Type
flat bottomi      bottom  as inverted segment      residue tcken out
af spherical shet1:              fromn middle
Dome Type
ri                    GAS CAP
\.AIX ING PIT
Fjoating Gasholder Type                                                                         ýL e a  CIIAN
o DRYNGC, PITSL
FERMENTrATrION WELL


- 26 -
topmost being a heavy metal "floating" gas holder that adjusts to changes in
volume by means of a system of guides and counterweights. Two Chinese designs
are less elaborate and require little in the way of fabricated metal parts or
other expensive materials. The "early Chinese" solution was to let accumula-
ting gas push the liquid contents of -the, digester-up -the- outlet (which is
covered but not pressure-sealed) and to minimize fluctuations in water level
by providing a large surface area between collected gas and liquid. "Recent
Chinese" biogas units are built with domes constructed to withstand pressures
of up to about 100 cm of water, and so accommodate fluctuations in gas quantity
by allowing pressure to build up within a fixed volume. A fourth design, the
"bag digester" makes use of a flexible material that easily adjusts to changes
in volume by changing shape.
4.        Biogas is usually produced under low pressures (5 to 10 cm water)
and often contains small amounts of hydrogen sulfide, which may cause corrosion
problems in any exposed metal parts with which the gas comes in contact.
However, with suitable adjustments to the burners, most applicances made for
natural gas or LPG can be adapted for use with biogas. Biogas can also be
used to run internal combustion engines, but to use it in vehicles would
require compressors and pressurized tanks.
5.        India and China have both launched large-scale biogas programs at
various times. The Indian program involved technical assistance and subsidies
on construction costs but reportedly resulted in the construction of only
about 37,000 plants over a period of time. One of the reasons for the
apparent failure of the Indian biogas digester to catch-on on a large scale is
its high initial capital cost -- a single family size unit cost about $375 in
1976, the equivalent of several times the average income per capita in rural
areas. Operating difficulties also seem to have been an obstacle to rapid
dissemination. The care and feeding of a biogas digester so as to maintain
efficient operation requires considerable skill and attention and villagers
may not have received adequate training or technical support. In addition,
the program was criticized and cut back on income-distribution grounds:
benefits went to the relatively wealthy who had the cattle, land, and credit
needed to build and use a biogas digester and, apparently, their introductirin
induced an increase in the value of dung, so that the program had a negative
impact on the real income of the poorest groups, who cook with dung obtained
from others.
6.        Biogas was one of. the technologies promoted in the Chinese "Great
Leap Forward" program of 1958-60, but use on a widespread basis reportedly did
not begin until the early 1970s. Since then the technology has spread rapidly,
with the result that, according to some reports, there were "well over" four
million biogas digesters in China by 1977. Although a sizeable number of
large scale digesters are said to have been built by communes to provide fuel
for farm machinery and electricity for workshops, most of the generators are
apparently family sized units built by individual households as "private
sector" activities. The simple Chinese designs are well adapted to do-it-
yourself construction and reportedly require a cash outlay for materials
equivalent, in Chinese prices, to roughly one-quarter to one-third of annual
per capita income in rural areas.


-27-
7.        While China's success with biogas digesters undoubtedly owes much to
the development of low cost designs, the Chinese experience also serves to
underscore the crucial role of the socio-cultural environment and of effective
institutions in the dissemination of biogas technology. The Chinese farmers'
traditional concern with maximizing-.the- value of -all resources at his dispos-al,-
the fact that manures have long been intensively utilized in agriculture and
the long standing practice in many areas of collecting night soil in under-
ground tanks no doubt all helped to create an especially propitious environment
for the adoption of the biogas digesters in China. In addition, the rapid
dissemination of biogas technology undoubtedly reflect the high degree of
organization in the rural sector, in general, and the effectiveness of the
country's extension-type services in disseminating information about biogas
digesters and their construction, in particular.
8.        Although there has been no dearth of studies of the economics of
biogas, the results have been more productive of controversy than of consensus.
Cost-benefit analyses of the comparatively well-documented Indian experience
has yielded conclusions ranging from "virtually hopeless" to "highly profit-
able," reflecting the widely different assumptins made about the economic
input cost of dung, the quantity and value of the labor required to operate
the digester and the value of the gas and sludge as fuel and fertilizer. The
only point that seems to clearly emerge from these studies, taken together, is
that the economic assessment of the biogas digester requires more definitive
work on methodology and values and that careful study of the specific socio-
economic context is essential to the proper evaluation of individual projects.
There is. alsD clearly a*-need t-o .br-eaden the b as-eof Texerienc-eon-wh-it1
economic analysis has been based and, in particular, to assess the impact on
biogas economics of the less costly Chinese designs. A preliminary Bank
investigation of the cost of reproducing the Chinese designs in other develop-
ing countries, based on the reported material and labor requirements, indicated
that the capital cost of a family size unit would in many countries be anywhere
from 55-75% lower than one constructed on the Indian model.
9.        The economic doubts and other issues raised by the Indian experience
have stimulated interest in employing biogas technology on a community rather
than household scale. Available construction cost data indicate that larger
unite benefit substantially from economies of scale; in addition, community
generatois could be operated by trained personnel for whom the necessary
technical back-up to deal with operating problems could be more readily
provided. On the other hand, community generators would incur additional
costs (e.g., for dung collection and gas distribution networks) and would in
general have to function as mini public utilities. Practical experience with
community generators has beon very limited (although a few are reported to
be oerating in Korea and India) but the concept appears to warrant further
exploration. The economic case for biogas is likely to be strongest where
large digesters are operated as part of commercial scale livestock, dairy,
poultry or swine raising operations. Such units seem likely to be able to
meet the heat and other energy needs of such enterprises and, perhaps, gener-
ate surplus gas that could be distributed to neighboring villages. Israeli
researchers have reportedly obtained high operating efficiencies in relatively
sophisticated high temperature digesters suitable for commercial operation.


- 28 -
PRODUCER GAS
1.        When wood or-other -carbonaceous -material (straw, nut- -shells, -coal,-
bark and rice hulls have been used; the primary constraints appear to be
mositure and ash content), is heated sufficiently in the presence of moisture
and limited amounts of air, the water and carbon will react to form carbon
monoxide and hydrogen in a combustible gaseous mixture known as "producer
gas." Producer gas typically contains about 25% carbon monoxide and 15%
hydrogen, giving it a fuel value about one-sixth that of natural gas.
2.        Producer gas can be burned under boilers. When filtered, it is also
a serviceable fule! for internal combustion engines, and it is produced for
this purpose on a commercial basis from rice hulls, cotton gin trash, saw mill
residues (principally bark in at least one case), and presumably from wood and
coal as well. It can be used to fuel vehicles either by using a small,
portable generator or by compressing the gas into cylinders, although this has
not been done except in wartime and similar shortage situations.
3.        The Bank has made at least two loans for projects involving the
production of producer gas, but neither project is yet operational. The SEMRY
rice mill in Cameroon will obtain its electricity from diesel engines running
on gas produced from rice husks. Equipment cost estimates including fuel
preparation and prime movers as well as gas generators work out to about
$1,500/kw fLo.b. Europe for 500 kw-unit -izesz.- This--system-is-expected t,o-be
less expensive in terms of both first cost and life-cycle costs than a conven-
tional boiler and steam-turbine system. In the other project, a lumber mill
and associated township in Guyana are to get their electric power from a
similar system operating with saw mill wastes. The cost of the 6MW power
station component at the Guyana project was estimated at appraisal at about
$800/kw, but bids have not yet been received.


- 29 -
C. OTHER SOLAR ENERGY SOURCES
SOLAR THERMAL
Flat-Plate Solar Collectors
1.        Water heating by means of the flat-plate collector is the solar
technology most "ready"--technically, economically and commercially--for
widespread application. The prototypical flat-plate collector is basically a
simple device consisting of a flat box with a glass top and a black bottom
encasing a set of tubes through which water, moving by convection or-with the
help of a pump, is heated by the sun. In tropical countries, the tubing
within the collector can be dispensed with and the water simply heated in a
flat container placed horizontally. Solar water heaters have been for some
time widely used in Japan (2.5 million units), Israel (100,000) and Australia.
They are also now being used on a growing scale in the U.S., where an estimated
30,000 units were installed in 1978. There is little data on actual use in
developing countries, which still seems limited and scattered. However, there
is evidence that developing country interest in solar heaters is now growing
rapidly.
2.        Domestic solar water heaters are being installed in the U.S. at
---    -* --- co-sts of about $500-per es-quare m                   iiide=bsekp
heaters for sunless days, protection against freezing, and other refinements
not always needed closer to the equator. A system capable of providing 70-8D0%
of the hot water needs of a family in Southern California presently costs
$2,500-$3,000 and provides hot water at a cost of roughly $400-450/t.o.e.,
which is competitive today at U.S. prices with heating water with electricity
or oil (but not gas). The typical Japanese solar hot water systems are more
modest and less costly than the U.S. models. Water is both heated and stored
in wide, long, clear plastic tubes covered with glass with units yielding
between 80-200 liters of warm water per day and costing about $100-$150. Even
assuming such modestly built collectors to be relatively short-lived, annual
capital charges would not exceed $25 per year. Then, if 150 liters of hot
water are produced daily with a 400C temperature gain, the cost would be about
$125 per t.o.e., considerably less than with conventional systems.
3.        Widespread use of solar water heaters in developing countries need
not depend upon imported devices. The capital costs of manufacturing facili-
ties are relatively low and the manufacturing processes themselves quite
straightforward. Thus, most developing countries could be expected to manu-
facture their own solar water heaters, usually from locally available mater-
ials--sheet metal, glass and insulating substances. Local manufacture has, in
fact, already begun in a considerable number of countries despite the fact
that the market continues to be largely limited to commercial enterprises,
such as hotels; to certain public facilities, such as hospitals; and to the
more affluent urban householders.


- 30 -
4.        Flat-plate collectors may also offer an economic means of meeting
low temperature industrial process heat needs. Collectors of more sophisti-
cated design using specialized materials can produce temperatures in the 900C
range which are sufficient for a variety of industrial processes. A laundry
service in California uses flat-plate collectors to provide low-temperature
heat, while a potato chip factory in Oregon uses trough collectors to obtain
higher temperatures. Such collectors are relatively expensive but in favorable
locations may alone or, more likely, in conjunction with conventional sources,
provide a least cost approach to meeting industrial energy requirements.
Drying
5.        The term "solar drying" includes techniques as simple as lying or
Hanging the material to be dried outdoors, to simply dry in Le sun. Sun
drying is appropriate for many uses, but has disadvantages that are important
in some cases: it is difficult to control temperatures, the material to be
dried cannot easily be protected from rain, wind, or animals, large areas are
often required. Controlled drying in an enclosed space avoids these problems
and may be worth the cost where a sensitive, high-value product such as fruit,
tobacco, or fish is involved, where space is constrained, or where the climate
does not permit sun drying.
6.        Solar equipment can be used instead of conventional fuels to provide
the heat needed for controlled drying. The use of such equipment has been
demonstrated for meats, f.ruit, vegatables,  a       be.
some cases, the solar drier has a transparent roof and functions as a green-
house. In others, such as that illustrated in Figure 6, air is heated in a
solar collector and moves by convection to the drying area.
Refrigeration
7.        Refrigeration can be provided using an absorption cycle with a solar
collector as a heat source. In this type of refrigerator, cold is produced by
evaporation of a liquid refrigerant with a suitable low boiling point (typi-
cally ammonia), which is reliquified by bringing it into contact with a second
liquid (the absorbant, typically water) into which it dissolves. The two
liquids are represented by distillation at a temperature between their respec-
tive boiling points. (This is where the solar heat is used.) At least with
ammonia and water, absorption must take place at a lower pressure than the
distillation, so some pumping effort is required to move the mixture of
liquids to the distillation unit. Where mechanical power is available, a
conventional pump is used. Where heat is the only source available, a third
fluid (typically, hydrogen) is needed to create the hydrostatic forces needed
to maintain circulation.
8.        Potential applications of solar thermal refrigeration range from
such small scale but important uses as maintaining the proper temperature for
storage of medical supplies to cold storage of fish, meat, dairy products, and
other foodstuffs. Economic feasibility is yet to be established.


- 31 -
Figure 6
SOLAR DRIER
TranLucn fibrgas top
Sunliht                              .:
wood
aw door
1.2'7
Rack
ckw,e.s ~e front -- -
w.rm ir
Åk      c in h-kp
n   -           o:ttom...awre__    ______
Section view of the fruit and vegetable drier
\_                EXPANDER
HYDRAULIC
PUMP
BOILER                    CONDENSER
\R                                               NIC
COLLECTORS°                                 °
ORGANIC
~LIQUID
WATER-
0    WATER
- RESERVOIR
Schematic of a Typical SOFRETES Solar Water Pumping System.


- 32 -
Concentrating Solar Collectors
9.        Focussing or concentrating collectors are used to obtain temperatures
above about 100 0C from sunlight. --Concentrating-cotac tors-geranday-tauatr-
make use of diffuse sunlight such as is typical of overcast conditions and
must be able to "track" the sun as it moves across the sky. The need for a
tracking system gives economies of scale in system size for concentrating
collectors, so they are usually considered as most appropriate for industrial
and commercial applications. "Trough" systems, which focus along a line
rather than a point, need to be moved only along one axis and appear to be the
most practical types for providing process heat in the 180 0C - 300 0C range.
10.       Solar industrial process heat systems are being developed, tested
and demonstrated in the U.S. and other countries, but are not yet considered
economic. A 1978 study by Mitre-Metrek suggests that "early commercial"
systems will become available in about 1984 capable of producing process heat
over 1000C at a cost of about $450 per t.o.e.
Solar Engines
11.       Several types of devices often referred to as "solar engines" have
been developed or are being tested and/or demonstrated. Generally, they are
either rotary or reciprocating engines working with the solar energy retrieved
from an appropriate collector and made available to a fluid acting as the
vector of -energy tran!sfer to the~mhait-at-parts- oftheengin'e- The`mechati-
cal energy thus produced is either used directly for driving irrigation pumps,
sawmills and other implements, or converted into electricity by means of a
generator.
12.       According to the upper temperature of the working fluid they may be
classified as low, medium and high temperature systems. The low.temperature
engines operate below 100 C? and use standard flat collectors while the
others use focussing solar collectors in order to achieve higher working
temperatures. In a typical low temperature system the hot fluid from the
collector is discharged into an evaporator containing the working fluid,
usually freons or simple hydrocarbons, which then flows to and expands into
the reciprocating or rotating engine. From there it is condensed in an air
or water cooled heat exchanger and then returns to the evaporator by means of
a pump generally operated by the engine itself. The collectors and heat
exchangers are of the conventional types known.
13.       Several engines designed for low temperature application have been
developed but only one of them, the SOFRETES (France), has reached the stage
of commercial availability (see Figure 7). It has been extensively demonstra-
ted in Africa and some Latin American countries; numerous operational problems
reportedly have been experienced and the results in general appear less than
encouraging. The medium and high temperature systems, although still in the


- 33 -
experimental stages, are basically similar in overall conception, although
some of them present some advantages like the use of water or air as the
working fluid and the possibility of using conventional steam engines or
turbines. The most advanced deisgn is the Stirling hot air engine which is
currently in limited commercial use.
14.       Solar engines, particularly of the low temperature variety, are
presently characterized by low efficiencies and large size that limit them to
producing small amounts of energy at high cost. I/ Thus, the present technol-
ogies do not seem likely to become competitive with conventional, or other
renewable, energy sources for any but the most limited applications. However,
much research is underway in the solar thermal field and new devices are
constantly appearing. For example, a number of novel pumping systems, some
with moving parts and some without, that reportedly have economic prom,ise are
being tested in India and Africa.
1/ The capital cost of even large SOFRETES engines produced in series is
estimated at about $30,000/kw.


-34-
PHOTOVOLTAICS
1.        Photovoltaic (PV) cells are unique among renewable energy devices
because of their ability to convert solar energy directly into electricity.
They also seem particularly well suited to developing country applications
because they promise to be long-lived and relatively trouble-free in opera-
tion. However, photovoltaic technology, which had its origins in the U.S.
space program some 25 years ago, is at present a high cost source of electri-
city. It is therefore being used commercially today only where relatively
small amounts of power are required in applications remote from conventional
power sources--e.g., telecommunications repeater stations, navigational buoys
and beacons, remote monitoring equipment, etc. The use of photovoltaics to
meet larger scale power needs is also being demonstrated by aid donors in a
number of village electrification and irrigation projects, particularly in
Africa. I/
2.        Most PV cells manufactured today are made from extremely thin slices
of high-purity silicon crystals, but cells made with other materials or
amorphous silicon may come into wider use in the future. Because they are cut
from single crystals, most PV cells are small, 5 to 10 cm in diameter, and
assembled into arrays. (See figure 8). The power produced by PV cells varies
in both voltage and amperage in response to changes in solar intensity and
temperature. Solar cells are generally rated in terms of "peak" power, that
which can. be-produced .-undert-.nearl-y,-optimal- -ter- estrial condition-sv *Ce 'lls Th--i '
good sites produce four to six watt-hours per day peak watt. This means that
quite large arrays are needed to produce even very modest amounts of power.
For example, the 100 peak watt array that would be required to keep two 60w
bulbs lit for four hours at night (by using batteries) would have to have a
surface area of some 13 sq. ft. (1.2 sq. meters).
3.        The price of PV cells is falling rapidly. Whereas PV cells in
relatively small quantities cost as much as US$100-200 per peak watt as
recently as 1970, prices today are quoted in the $10-20 range, depending on
quantity, quality and the source of supply. The reported price for what may
hav- been the largest commercial PV purchase to date (31 peak kilowatts for
deiivery ihn 1979 to the Australian National Railways) works out to about $16
per peak watt. While it is widely assumed that the PV array costs will
continue to drop rapidly in the next few years, it now seems unlikely that the
US Department of Energy target of reducing prices by 1985 to the US$0.50 per
peak watt level (in 1975 prices) can be achieved.
4.        As the price of arrays themselves drops, the cost of the balance of
PV power systems--items such as structural supports, electrical controls, wiring,
1/  The Bank is executing agent for a UNDP-financed global demonstration
project that is testing photovoltaic as well as other solar power sources
for small irrigation pumps.


-.“」J스―[
,:&‘珊． 섶’ ,：·，,Ph。fovo胸댜颯
PhofovO什。！C 凡’O겁IU!e
_ 7「r슨 i& &&  . ·꿸［


36
and batteries--become increasingly -important. These costs of course vary
greatly from application to application. The Table below summarizes the major
hardware and installation costs involved in a recent USAID funded PV demon-
stration project in Africa.
UPPER VOLTA "SOLAR VILLAGE"PROJECT
6/78 Cost Estimates from NASA
($/Peak watt)
Solar Cell Modules (1,785 peak watts)       18.09
Spares (2%)                                .73
18.82
Structure, wiring, other materials,
test and assembly                        2.31
Controls, instruments and assembly           4.59
Tools and supplies                           0.56
7.46
Batteries and racks                          2.89
Total equipment and assembly costs          $29.17
Notes: Batteries --pr-ovi&e-200-0-
Loads require 4.4 peak hour/day production
Shipping costs not included.
In this case, balance-of-system cost totaling more than $10 per peak watt
(including batteries) accounted for more than one-third of total PV equipment
costs. Economies in balance-of-system costs can be expected a,.PV cells costs
decline because system designers will become increasingly concerned with
reducing these costs and decreasingly concerned with maximizing the utiliza-
tinn nf thp nA118. Thus. we miqht exnect to see round cells trimmed into
squares or hexagons so that more can be packed in a square meter to reduce
structural support requirements, controls might be made less expensive if it
were less important to use the weak power produced during periods of low light,
etc. However, the scope for reductions in balance-of-system costs is rela-
tively limited and it seems unlikely that they will fall below, say, $7 per
p0ak watt (in 1979 prices) by 1985.
5.        If array costs can be reduced by 1985 to the area of $3 per peak
watt, then total system costs could fall as low as $10 per peak watt. However,
even "-t this level PV power would still cost 5U/kwh (assuming 10% p.a. capital
recovery) in a location providing five peak hour equivalents per day, which is
near the maximum. Thus it appears that PV power is unlikely, at least in the
medium term, to be competitive with conventionally-generated power for village
electrification and large-scale irrigation pumping. However, as costs are
re(,'uced, an expanded role for photovoltaics can be foreseen in specialized low
power applications (e.g., powering refrigerators in rural clinics and educa-t
tional Ti'7  in village schools) in remote areas.


- 37 -
WINDMILLS
1.        Windmills are a source of stationary mechanical power which was
widely used in pre-industrial-times and-in -which-there-ha-s-b-eena-revival of
interest. The most established applications historically were water pumping
and grain-grinding, but windmills also powered sawmills, paper mills, and oil
presses. A US National Science Foundation report estimates that in 1850 there
were over six million windmills in the U.S. alone producing the mechanical
J          equivalent of an average of about 0.5 kwh/day. The larger traditional Dutch
windmills reached the equivalent of 35 kw unit size. Traditional windmills
continue to be used in large numbers in parts of Crete and Thailand.
2.        Windmills exist and are proposed in a wide variety of configurations,
sizes, and materials, as illustrated in Figure 9. The wide diversity in
designs appears to relfect both the need for different design approaches to
match differing wind regimes and applications and the fact that experience has
not yet sorted out all the advantages and disadvantages of competing designs.
3.        The cost of harnessing wind energy has been estimated as being on
the order of 204/kwh assuming a 5.5 hr/day operation with winds of 5m/sec (11
mph). Table 1 shows cost computations for a variety of water pumping windmills.
If these cost estimates can be confirmed in practice, then it would appear
that windmills can compete with conventionally powered pumps in areas where
connections to a-central electrical grid are not available and winds are of a
strength which is available-in certain regions in many developing countries.
Winds are not generally as strong in the tropics as they are at higher lati-
tudes, but there are areas where the trade winds and/or geographic features
such as mountains and coast lines produce average windspeeds over 5 m/sec.
The most interesting areas for wind-powered water pumps are presumably those
with adequate winds and poor rainfall. Among these would appear to be parts
of northern Mexico, Peru, Chile, Argentina, northeastern Brazili coastal areas
of Africa northward from about Senegal in the west and Somalia in the east,
Namibia, Yemen PDR, India and Pakistan.
4.        Windmill powered pumping is generally more competitive for low-head
than for high-head applications. This can be explained by the economics of
well drilling (much more rapid cost escalation with depth than with diameter),
which encourage the use of smaller numbers of larger diameter wells when
drawing from deep sources than from shallow ones. Both the greater depth and
the greater flow rate per well imply the need for more powerful prime movers,
while windmills appear to have their comparative advantage in small unit
sizes.
5.        Some approaches to windmill designs emphasize minimization of cash
costs and keeping materials, fabrication, and maintenance requirements within
the capabilities of local artisans. The resulting "appropriate technology"
designs appear to provide least-cost solutions in many cases, at least where
low pumping heads permit low unit sizes and where modest windspeeds encourage
light weight designs.


Figure 9
Windmill Taxonomy
Horizontal Axis Windmills                                      Vertical Axis Windmills
(primarily drag type)
Savonius   Multi-bladed
One-blade       Three-blade  Fan-wheel    Bicycle-wheel                        Savonius     Hooded         Cupped
Two-blade
(primarily lift type)
up-wiind      down-wind
up-l-.nd  d=Darrieus               -Darrieus     Giromill         Turbine
Sail-wing
(combinations)
Enfield-Andeau
Split
Savonius/ý-Darrieus Savonius      Magnus         Airfoil
Multi-rotor                Counter-rotating
Co thers)
Cross-wind Cross-wind   Diffuser Concentra- Unconfined
Savonius    paddles               tor          Vortex              Def lector   Sunlight       Venturi
Combined


- 39 -
Table 1
WATER PUMPING WINDMILLS
Initial Pumping    Unit      Unit     Starting-Rated-Cutoff   Fabrication                Principal
Cost    Power      Cost       Cost        Windspeeds          Requirements                  Use
($)     (watts)    ($/kw)     ($/kwh)        (m/sec)
SAIL ROTOR TYPES
Asia Hybrid                  350     '514       680        7-8         1.6-5.6-6.0         Good carpentry             Theoretical
Cretan                      480       43      11000       54-74        2.2-3.5-4.0         Metal welding             Irrigation
Madurai                      4oo      51       7800       76-88        1.7-2.2-4.5         Metal welding             Test
NAIE                         500      74       68600      56-67        n.a.-3.5-n.a        Metal drilling, cutting   Aquaculture
Omo-11                       350      14      25000      112-158       n.a.-4.6-5.0        Metal welding              Irrigation
Omo-14                       360      31      12000       55-77        n.a.-4.6-5.0        Metal welding              Irrigation
Omo-16                       400      57       7000       34-47        n.a.-4.6-5.0        Metal welding             Irrigation
Sarvodaya                    300      43       7000       68-78       n.a.-5.4-6.o        Metal welding             Irrigation
Thai bamboo                  165      89       1900       21-24        n.a._-4.2-6.0       Rough carpentry           Salt ponds
Thai cloth                   246     237       1000       11-13        2.8-3.7-6.0         Rough carpentry           Salt ponds
MULTI-VANE TYPES
Aeromotor Argentina         2538     177      14000       47-76        n.a.-6.7-n.a.        Gear making               Cattle
Baker                        750     188       4ooo       13-21        n.a.-6.7-n.a.        Gear making              Cattle
Bossel                        92      22       4200       69-75        n.a.-n.a.-n.a.      Metal welding             n.a.
IT,                         1800     49       37000      252-309       n.a.-5.6-n.a.       Machine lathing           Test
Sahoros                      100     26        3900       63-68        2.0-n.a.-n.a.      Machine lathing           Cattle
Sanit                       1084     31       34000      147-211       2.2-n.a.-n.a.       Machine lathing           Cattle.,
Southern Cross "iz"        1016     103        9900       33-54        n.a.-n.a.-n.a.      Gear making               Cattle
Tyabji                      1530     148      10000       27-36        2.2-n.a.-19.4       Machine lathing           Irrigation
USAID 1954                    84      21       4100       35-42         n.a.-n.a.-n.a.      Machine lathing           Proposal
USAID 1960                   275      25      11000       97-114       n.a.-n.a.-n.a.      Machine lathing           Experimental
WP-2                        1200     149       8100       27-44        2.2-4.4-13.4         Gear making              Domestic
MEDIUM SPEED 4-BLADE ROTOR TYPE
Moorhouse                    153       3       47000     350-429        2.7-n.a.-n.a.       Steel casting             Cattle
g    HIGH-SPEED ROTOR TYPES
Allgaier                   20000     529       38000     154-223        n.a.-n.a.-n.a.      Hydraulics fitting        Test, Irrigation
Thai 2 blade                 268     231        1200       7-9          n.a.-5.8-n.a.       Fine carpentry            Irrigation
NOTES:   Pumping power and unit costs based on pump output, at rated windspeed, corrected to 10 meter head and converted to electrical
units at 35 m3/hr per kilowatt. Unit costs per kwh inc ude interest and amortization over estimated life plus spare parts
allowance, assuming 2000 hr/yr. operation at 5 and 10 percent discount rates. 1.0 m/sec = 2.24 mph.
Source: M. M. Sherman, "Practical Applications of Wind-Powered Water Pumps." ESCAP document dated 17 Feb. 77.


-40-
6.        Wind-driven electric generators are available commercially in unit
sizes up to at least 15 kilowatts rated capacity. Table 2 indicates that some
of these can produce power at costs of 25-50w/kwh at low load factors and
5-154/kwh at high load-factors in.ocations with-average_ wids,eds--in-excess..
of 5 m/sec (11 mph). The Bank has financed at least one wind-power feasibility
study as a component of a power loan. Similar studies may be justifiable in
other countries with small, isolated load centers in coastal or other areas
with good wind regimes.
7.        Large windmills capable of generating from several hundred kilowatts
up to several megawatts of power have been demonstrated (although accidents
with large windmills have not been uncommon) and are under further development.
Such windmills could serve as central generating stations integrated.into the
national grid. However, until the design and operating problems of these
devices have been worked out in the developed countries, which generally have
better wind resources as well as technological expertise, it is probably
premature to consider grid-connected windmills in developing countries.


-41-
Table 2
SMALL WIND-GENERATOR COST ESTIMATES
Model                        Elektro        Dunlite         Dynergy
WVG-50         BP           5m Darrieus
Installed cost (1977)         $11,770       $9,020        $13,230 1/
OMR cost                      $430/yr       $260/yr       $430/yr 2/
Output at windspeed of:
10 mph =  4.5 m/s          1.5 kw        0.1 kw         0.5 kw  -
15 mph =  6.7 m/s          3.5            0.5           1.7
20 mph =  8.9 m/s          5.0            1.2           4.3
25 mph = 11.2 m/s          5.0            1.8           5.0
Unit cost at 2000 hr/yr (23%) operating factor
10 mph                   541/kwh       5814/kwh       175w/kwh
15 mph                    23.0          116            52
20 mph                    16.1           48            20.4
25 mph                    16.1           32            17.5
Unit cost at 8000 hr/yr (91%) operating factor
1D -mph -    -   -    - - 1-3.4-/kwh-- -1454/hwh----    4   w
15 mph                     5.7           29            12.9
20 mph                     4.0           12.1           5.1
25 mph                     4.0            8.1           4.4
Unit cost estimate assumes 10% p.a. capital charge.
Sources: W. R. Lorman, Digest of Equipment for Converting Solar,
Wind and Geothermal Energy into Electric Power for USN
Application Ashore, November 1978, and Dynergy Corp.
literature, November 1978.
1/ 1978 FOB cost plus 20%
2/ Assumed equal to Elektro


-42-
SMALL HYDRO
1.        Waterwheels have been used for-thousands- of-years, primarily to
grind grain. One historian estimates that in the year 1800 there were about a
half-million waterwheels in Europe producing the mechanical equivalent of
between six and twelve watts per capita. I/ Waterwheels are reportedly in
fairly wide use today in mountainous areas in Nepal, Afghanistan and Turkey,
constructed by skilled traditional artisans using well-known and reliable
technologies (Figure 10). Waterwheels have recently attracted commercial
interest in industrial countries and prices quoted in 1978 for fiberglass
waterwheels for export from the U.K. in kit form were as follows: 2/
Wheel diameter             16 ft.    20 ft.
Maximum advised rpm       10         6-8
Maximum output (approx.) 11 kw       25 kw
Price                     $2400      $3600
$218/kw   $144/kw
Where appropriate sites can be found, these cost levels and the simplicity and
considered for energy requirements that can be served by a stationary, low rpm
power source.
2.        Turbines are generally preferred to waterwheels for electricity
production because turbines spin at the much higher rates required by electric
generators. The Bank has, of course, financed the purchase of many turbines
for use in conventional hydro-power projects. The discussion here will focus
on units with capacities of no more than several hundred kilowatts and most
often 5-50 kw used to provide electricity to a few users or to individual
villages. Turbine systems with capacities of less than 50 kw have been
installed in over two dozen developing countries, and there are reportedly
over 80,000 small-hydro systems operating in P.R. China.
3.        Unit costs of small-hydro projects can be expected to vary widely,
depending on the characteristics of the site, the available water resource,
and the distance to, magnitude, and time-pattern of the electricity demand.
The lowest cost sites are those which can provide large volumes of water and
high heads without much investment in civil works. Transmission losses over
even a few hundred meters can be substantial if investment costs are minimized
1/ F. Braudel, Capitalism and Material Life 1400-1800, Chapter 5.
2/ D. McGuigan, Harnessing Water Power for Home Energy, p. 18.


-43 -
Figure 10
SMALL HYDRO EQUIPMENT
1                           1
-    -        >4                     i:Z  ~
4Ä
Sixteen foot water-wheel
Ink&*
Tpc.a..oPlan# and
y controls
3 7 0 m.
Typical layout of micro hydro-plant.


-44-
by using low voltages and light wiring, so profimity to demand is an 'important
consideration in evaluating small hydro projects. Electric systems designed
to meet demands that are concentrated in a few hours each evening will gen-
erally have higher costs-pe-r kwh-than-a-yst.emswithr-esCOnsta.nt-loads.--A v..
recent UNIDO/IPCO paper 1/ cites a typical range at $500 to $3,000 per kilowatt
for small hydro stations (excluding transmission and distribution) with the-           C
cost broken down roughly as follows: (component costs include installation)
Turbine                              20-30%
Pipeline and related metal parts     10-20%
Electrical parts                     15-30%
Civil works                          30-60%
This cost range appears to apply to projects with larger capacities than those
referred to in Table 3, which shows about the same range of costs for purchase
of the turbine and electrical parts alone. There are clearly important
economies of scale in small hydro generating equipment and probably significant
differences in equipment quality and prices across suppliers as well.
4.        The Intermediate Technology Development Group (UK) has compiled cost
estimates for a "model" 40--kw project based on six existing and planned sites
in Nepal. Its total cost would be $1600/kw, which would probably make it a
least-cost solution for village electrification. However, the affordability
of such a solution is another matter. Cost per kwh would be very high unless
significant' demand exists -for-electricity- for-purposes-other-than-domes tic -
lighting. Daytime demand that could appreciably raise the load factor might
be for commercial, small industry, or agricultural uses, or from households if
incomes are sufficient to allow for purchase of a variety of appliances.
5.        Small hydro stations convert hydro power to electricity with effi-
ciencies between 50 and 75 percent. The volume of water required to produce a
kwh is thus between 500 and 750 cubic meters divided by the number of meters
of vertical drop or "head" that is developed. This volume of water can be
compared with those required for irrigation: if a household lives near a site
that provides five meters of head, the flow required to produce 1.5 kwh/day of
electricity would cover 6.6 hectares to a depth of one meter over the course
of a year.
6.        A national small-hydro development program might begin with a
general survey permitting identification of an area within which prospects for
projects were generally favorable and a first estimation of the number of
sites and the type of equipment that would be needed. On the basis of this
information, a second stage could be designed that would include the more
1/ "The promotion of Investment in Projects for The Production of Mini-
hydro Electric Generation Units in Developing Countries", presented
in Kathmandu, September 1979.


-45-
Table 3
MICRO-HYDRO GENERATING EQUIPMENT COSTS
Page ref.    Equipment       Max. Power   Rated Head    Cost       Unit Cost
(kw)        (feet)      Cs)         ($/kw)
31           IPD Pelton        0.125        46          2385         19000
1.9          290                     1300
33           Electro Pelton    0.3          n.a.        1,100/a      3700/a
24           n.a.      12,000/a       500/a
32           SHSE Pelton       15           n.a.        6,000         400
39           Turgo             18            97        12,160         680
40           Hydec Turgo       25           40         19,200         770
47           Ossberger         15            15        36,000        2400
51           Hydro Light       5            29         11765/b       2400/b
61           IPD Propeller     2            5-50        3700         1800
63           Jyoti             3-5          10-40     5500-8000      ca 1800
10          10-40      6000-7000     ca 650
25         197-425     7500-12000    ca 400
64           Canyon            0.5          50         395            790
Notes:
Cost basis apparently 1977-1978.
Costs include turbine, generator and alternator, but not civil works, batter-
ies, or distribution investments.
a/  Generator and alternator may not be included.
b/ at 1.7 D-Mark per dollar
Source: Harnessing Water Power for Home Energy by D. McGuigan, 1978


-46-
detailed studies of individual sites needed to design the civil works, specify
the equipment requirements 2/, and verify the economic feasibility of each
installation. If appropriate, establishment of plants to fabricate the
turbines and some of the other-equipment-could be included.-3f Financial-and
institutional arrangements would also have to be made in this stage. Finally,
the third stage of the program would be the construction and installation
phase.
2/  Table 4 indicates the type of data required.
3/  Table 5 summarizes UNIDO descriptions of the workshops and staffing
that would be involved. Small hydro equipment is manufactured in India,
Nepal, P.R. China, Colombia, Indonesia, and, probably other developing
countries. Most manufacturers produce equipment to cover a range of flow
rates and heads.


-47-
Table 4
SMALL-HYDRO SITE SURVEY CHECKLIST
(Data required for-equipment cost estimate)
A. Site Characteristics
1. Gross head
2. Expected net head
3. Run-of-river or storage?
4. Penstock length
5. Penstock diamters
6. Number of units to be installed
7. Minimum height of turbine house floor above
normal tail water level
B. Operating Environment
1. Altitude
2. Maximum ambient temperature
3. Tropical climatic conditions?
4. Water consistently clear or sometimes silty?
C. Electrical System Requirements
,1. kw to be installed
2. Expect extended operations at less than half
load?
3. 50 or 60 cycles?
4. Voltage
5. Synchronous or asynchronous generator?
Source: Adapted from Gilkes, Water Turbines for Hydro-Electric Power


-48-
Table 5
WORKSHOP REQUIRENENTS FOR FABRICATION OF SMALL HYDRO TURBINES
AND RELATED EQUIPMENT
Fabrication of          Conduits, weed screens,          Kaplan, Francis
inlet gates, shut-off            and Pelton Turbines
valves, and draft tubes
Engineers                      1-2                              2
Technical designers            --                               3     -
Foremen                                                         2
Skilled metal workers          ca. 10                          20
Unskilled workers              ca. 5                            5
Admin. staff                   --                               3
Workshop area                  600 m                            600m
Equipment budget               $165,000                         $440,000
Notes: Fabrication of a 200--kw turbine in the assumed workshop would take up-
to 10-16 months in the pilot production phase and half that long in regular
production. The simpler equipment could be fabricated in from 3-6 months in
the workshop described. The workshops would require power, steel sheet and
profiles, foundry castings, small standard parts, and access to tool grinding
and templates for maintenance.
Source: UNIDO Investment Cooperative Program Office (IPCO).
Paper presented in Kathmandu, September 1979.

